.\" mvis.1 - man page for mvis (Memory Visualizer)
.TH MVIS 1 "2026-06-18" "mvis v0.4.0-rc1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mvis \- cross-platform memory diagnostic CLI tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mvis
.RI [ \-\-theme
.IR name ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.br
.B mvis scan
.I process mode
.RB [ \-json
.RI [ output ]]
.br
.B mvis leak
.I process interval
.br
.B mvis leak\-m
.I process interval samples
.br
.B mvis list
.RI [ filter ]
.br
.B mvis modules
.I process
.RB [ \-t ]
.br
.B mvis trace
.I process
.br
.B mvis tui
.br
.B mvis version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mvis
(Memory Visualizer) is a cross-platform memory diagnostic tool for analyzing
process memory, detecting leaks, and monitoring heap allocations. It provides
both a command-line interface and an interactive terminal user interface (TUI).
.PP
When invoked with no arguments,
.B mvis
launches the interactive TUI.
.PP
Process names are resolved using fuzzy matching: an exact case-insensitive match
is tried first, then a substring search. When multiple distinct process names
match, an interactive selection prompt is displayed.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "scan " "process mode" " [-json] [output]"
Analyze the memory layout of a running process.
.I mode
must be one of:
.RS
.TP
.B \-h
Heap mode. Shows heap statistics including block counts, fragmentation analysis,
allocation size distribution, and the top 10 largest allocations.
.TP
.B \-a
All regions. Displays a complete memory map with a visual bar chart. Region
types are shown as:
.B I
(image),
.B M
(mapped),
.B X
(executable),
.B H
(heap),
.B S
(stack),
.B G
(guard),
.B .
(free).
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose output. Shows loaded DLLs and modules in a detailed table format.
.RE
.IP
The optional
.B \-json
flag outputs results as JSON. When
.I output
is given with
.BR \-json ,
results are written to the specified file path.
.TP
.BI "leak " "process interval"
Monitor a process for memory leaks over time. Takes an initial memory snapshot,
waits
.I interval
seconds, takes another snapshot, and computes the delta of heap blocks to detect
unreleased allocations.
.I interval
must be a positive integer.
.TP
.BI "leak\-m " "process interval samples"
Detect memory leaks using a fixed number of samples. Collects
.I samples
snapshots at
.I interval
second intervals. Both values must be positive integers.
.TP
.BI "list " [filter]
Show the top 20 running processes sorted by memory usage (descending). If
.I filter
is given, only processes whose name matches the filter (case-insensitive
substring) are shown.
.TP
.BI "modules " "process" " [-t]"
List loaded modules for a process and check for tampering, injection, or
modification. Each module is shown with its address, size, status, and name.
Status values:
.BR OK ,
.BR TAMPERED ,
.BR INJECTED ,
.BR MODIFIED ,
.BR UNREADABLE .
.IP
With the
.B \-t
flag, only tampered or injected modules are shown.
.TP
.BI "trace " process
Capture and display a stack trace for a running process. On stripped binaries,
function names may not be available; recompile with
.B \-g
to see them.
.TP
.B tui
Launch the interactive Terminal User Interface. The TUI provides a memory
analysis dashboard with real-time leak detection, process selection, multiple
heap view modes, and a command input line.
.IP
Commands available inside the TUI:
.RS
.TP
.BI "scan " "proc " \-a|\-h|\-v
Run a memory scan in the selected mode.
.TP
.BI "leak " "proc secs"
Detect leaks with the specified interval.
.TP
.BI "leak\-m " "proc secs samples"
Multi-sample leak detection.
.TP
.BI "watch " "proc " [flag]
Watch a process continuously.
.TP
.B stopwatch
Stop the current watch.
.TP
.BI "baseline " proc
Capture a baseline snapshot for comparison.
.TP
.BI "diff " proc
Compare current state to the stored baseline.
.TP
.B clearbaseline
Clear the stored baseline.
.TP
.B list
List processes.
.TP
.B clear
Clear output history.
.TP
.B help
Show available TUI commands.
.RE
.TP
.BI "help " [command]
Display help information. If
.I command
is given, shows help for that specific command. Also available as
.B \-h
or
.BR \-\-help .
.TP
.B version
Display the version string. Also available as
.B \-v
or
.BR \-\-version .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-theme " name"
Set the UI theme. Must appear before the command. Available themes:
.BR dark " (default),"
.BR light ,
.BR deuteranopia ,
.BR protanopia .
The latter two are color-blind friendly.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MVIS_THEME
Set the default UI theme without a command-line flag. Accepted values:
.BR dark ,
.BR light ,
.BR deuteranopia ,
.BR protanopia .
The
.B \-\-theme
flag takes precedence over this variable.
.SH EXAMPLES
Scan heap statistics for a process:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis scan my_app \-h
.fi
.RE
.PP
Visualize all memory regions and export as JSON:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis scan my_app \-a \-json report.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Monitor a process for leaks every 10 seconds:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis leak my_app 10
.fi
.RE
.PP
Collect 12 leak samples at 5-second intervals:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis leak\-m my_app 5 12
.fi
.RE
.PP
List top processes by memory, filtering for "firefox":
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis list firefox
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check loaded modules for tampering:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis modules my_app \-t
.fi
.RE
.PP
Launch the TUI with a light theme:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ mvis \-\-theme light tui
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use an environment variable for the theme:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ export MVIS_THEME=deuteranopia
$ mvis tui
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred. The error message is printed to standard error.
.SH PLATFORM NOTES
.B mvis
runs on Linux, macOS, and Windows.
.PP
On Linux, process inspection uses
.BR ptrace (2)
and the
.I /proc
filesystem. Some operations may require root privileges or
.B CAP_SYS_PTRACE
capability.
.PP
On macOS, the
.B com.apple.security.cs.debugger
entitlement may be required to inspect other processes.
.PP
The
.B wintrace
command is only available on Windows.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/m-visualizer/m-vis/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
The mvis contributors.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR top (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR pmap (1),
.BR valgrind (1),
.BR proc (5)
